# Short Packet Communication: A New Norm for 6G

Short packet communication is a communication mode in IoT networks that numerous short packets containing 
only a few hundreds of bits are exchanged [Durisi2016]. For example, short packets represent the most common 
form of traffic generated by sensors and other IoT devices in mMTC and URLLC. Such short packets carry 
critical information that must be delivered with low latency and high reliability. Such type of 
communication will become more significant in 6G. It has been a hot research topic on new theory and channel 
encoding to handle short packets in wireless environments.

When packets become short, the relative size of the packet header is no longer negligible. To support short 
packet communication efficiently, at the network level we need to reduce the packet overhead to the minimum. 
And we need to do this with the least cost because processing in IoT devices needs power, resource, and time. 
It’s critical for the network layer to minimize the header size while allowing low-cost communication between 
IoT devices and for Internet access.

Here are several issues to consider:

1.	Efficient cross-layer design. Is that possible to merge or unify the layer 2 and layer 3 headers? Is that 
possible to make the node ID the same as its address?

2.	Stateless forwarding. Can we support the stateless L3 forwarding without needing to maintain the contexts 
for each communication flow and perform complex compression/decompression operations at IoT devices?

3.	Internet Access. Can we allow effort-free access to Internet or remote entities? This is necessary because 
many tasks are offloaded to cloud and the IoT devices may need to be accessed remotely. Can we offload the 
complexity to routers and simplify the IoT devices? 

Unfortunately, while IPv6 is widely deployed and will also be used in IoT domain, its header overhead becomes 
a big concern in short packet communication. The current efforts in L3 header compression fall short to answer 
the question of 2 and 3. A way to effectively reduce the IPv6 header overhead is to truncate the prefixes from 
IPv6 addresses to make them short and maintain such prefixes in gateway routers [Song2020]. This will add some 
extra functions to routers, but it also simplifies the router data plane and control plane in many ways. Most 
importantly, it can significantly shorten the header overhead and simplify the L3 processing in IoT devices. 
This is just a start. More research should be done in this area to cover the aforementioned issues.

Reference:

[Durisi2016] G. Durisi, T. Koch and P. Popovski, "Toward Massive, Ultrareliable, and Low-Latency Wireless 
Communication with Short Packets," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 9, pp. 1711-1726, Sept. 2016, 
doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2016.2537298.

[Song2020] H. Song, Z. Zhang, Y. Qu and J. Guichard, "Adaptive Addresses for Next Generation IP Protocol 
in Hierarchical Networks," 2020 IEEE 28th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), 2020, 
pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICNP49622.2020.9259354.
